My Thesis Project for the Neuroscience Distinguished Major Program at the University of Virginia.
Data collected with the Condron Lab: https://www.condronlab.com/.

**Background**
During development, Drosophila larvae develop complex social behaviors, such as forming cooperative synchronized digging clusters (Louis & Polavieja, 2017). The digging clusters create a common air cavity and allow larvae to forage deeper into the food. To form and preserve a digging cluster, larvae must cooperate as a collective group to align by their posterior breathing spiracles while maintaining contact with the air (Dombrovski et al., 2017). Although clustering induces development delay, the behavior was found to accompany fitness benefits in adulthood, which may explain the high frequency of this behavior among wild-type larvae (Dombrovski et al., 2020). Despite large-scale cooperation, some larvae do not participate in the digging clusters. Our previous experiments showed that vision and social experience crucially impact cooperation among larvae, with blind and socially isolated larvae forming fewer clusters, digging less efficiently, and failing to effectively integrate into wild-type digging clusters (Dombrovski et al., 2017). Until now, this clustering behavior has only been analyzed by human researchers, which is time consuming and introduces error. To automate larval tracking, I am adapting Social LEAP Estimates Animal Poses (SLEAP), a machine learning system for animal tracking (Pereira et al., 2022). Training this system to track larval positions allows our lab to quantitatively measure cooperative clustering and to determine other factors that impact the degree of social clustering among larvae. This project is a proof of concept method that determines if the AI model can predict as accurately as human researchers.

**Significance of Work**
Precise analysis of larval behavior allows our lab to define the normal development of cooperative clustering behaviors and identify different conditions that impact the emergence of this advanced social behavior. Further, tracking the anterior mouth hooks allows for analysis of feeding patterns, while tracking the spiracles allows for analysis of breathing. Tracking these movements together may inform why larvae instinctively form these cooperative clusters by highlighting fitness advantages. These findings may broaden our understanding of the mechanisms and factors influencing the cooperative behaviors developed by animals. The project has already promoted communication with researchers at Harvard who are working to develop a similar model, and I anticipate collaborating with more researchers as the project develops. The most significant impact of the work is the implementation of a state-of-the-art machine learning method at the University of Virginia. As the first machine learning system for animal tracking at UVA, this model will inform the community of how this technology works and may pioneer the development of similar tracking methods in other laboratories on grounds.
